---
layout: post
title:  "Ubuntu Jammy disables ssh-rsa"
date:   2022-07-05 12:00:00
categories: ubuntu
---

Have you upgrade to Ubuntu Jammy lately, and have SSH access or git breaking? If
so, you have come to the right place!

Ubuntu Jammy (22.04) launched recently, and one of the biggest changes is that
`ssh-rsa` is [disabled by default](jammy-release-notes) in the version of
OpenSSH it ships with.

There is a lot of confusion on the internet, and docs still seems to be a bit
sketchy, so I hope this will help someone out!

# Points to note
- There is a key _type_ `ssh-rsa`. This is the 'default' key that OpenSSH has been
  generating. You may probably have a key of this type. __This is not disabled,
yet.__

- There is a key _algorithm_, also named `ssh-rsa`. __This is the one that is
  disabled.__ This uses the `ssh-rsa` key _type_, along with SHA-1 hash, for
authentication in SSH. SHA-1 hash is now considered broken, and should be
replaced with SHA-256 or SHA-512 hash.

- To allow for continuing use of key _type_ `ssh-rsa`, [RFC8332][rfc8332]
  defined two new key _algorithm_, `rsa-sha2-256` and `rsa-sha2-512`. This has
been supported by major operating systems for a while.

- SSH clients and servers negotiates and uses the stronger algorithms if they
  are supported. Clients also fall back to use the weaker algorithm if not.
Therefor, you may be using your `ssh-rsa` key _type_ with a bunch of different
servers with varying key _algorithms_ without realising it.

- Ubuntu Jammy, as an SSH Client, will now refuse to talk to a server if it
  tries to use the weaker `ssh-rsa` key _algorithm_ for SSH.

This means that your `ssh-rsa` key can still be used, however, the server you
are talking to MUST support the newer key algorithms.

Unfortunately, the `rsa-sha2-256` support is still making its way into major
software. See the list below for more information.

# Testing

To test if a server supports `rsa-sha2-256` or `rsa-sha2-512`, do the following

```ssh -o PubkeyAcceptedKeyTypes=rsa-sha2-256 <user>@<server>```

You can also test for any key type NOT `ssh-rsa` by doing

```ssh -o PubkeyAcceptedKeyTypes=ssh-rsa <user>@<server>```

If it breaks, this means the software doesn't support `rsa-sha2-256`. You can,
in order of preference:

- allow list the particular server,
- upgrade to a newer version (check the software list below), or
- change to use `ed25519` keys.

# Allow listing servers

You can set this in your SSH config (`~/.ssh/config`) for each server you want
to use the weaker key with.

```
Host <hostname>
    PubkeyAcceptedKeyTypes +ssh-rsa
```

# Software needing update

You might be running a particular application that breaks now that you are
connecting to it from Jammy. This is because a lot of SSH servers traditionally
only supports the basic SHA-1 `ssh-rsa`, and have not implemented
`rsa-sha2-256`. This includes many SSH libraries, like paramiko and mina, which
other software uses to build the SSH/GIT server functionality.

These libraries have released newer versions which supports `rsa-sha2-256`, but
as we engineers know, you can mark a thing as deprecated for a LONG TIME and
people will keep using it, only upgrading once things break. :)

Here is a list of links to different software

- [openssh](http://www.openssh.com/txt/release-8.7)
- [paramiko](https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/paramiko/+bug/1961979)
- [bitbucket](https://jira.atlassian.com/browse/BSERV-13013)
- [mina](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SSHD-895)
- [gerrit](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/gerrit/issues/detail?id=13930)


Hope this helps to clear the confusion! Feel free to reach out with suggestions
/ improvements.

[jammy-release-notes]: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/jammy-jellyfish-release-notes/24668
[rfc8332]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8332
